Postgres10 #8324 ke (#712)
SUSE/doc-susemanager: adoc/bp_postgresql_database_migration.adoc

New {productname} installations will have PostgreSQL version 10 installed by default.
When you install {productname} on {sle}{nbsp}12 SP4, the latest version of PostgreSQL will be installed by default.
This will be fully transparent to the user.
Check the active PostgreSQL version with this command:

----
suse-manager-example-srv:~ # psql --version
psql (PostgreSQL) 10.9
----

[[bp.postgresql.database.migrating.existing.installations]]
== Migrating an Existing Installation

[WARNING]
====
Always create a database backup before performing a migration.
For more information about a database backup, see xref:bp_chap_suma_backup.adoc[].
====

PostgreSQL upgrades can be performed in two ways: a regular upgrade, or a fast upgrade:

A regular upgrade will create a complete copy of the database, so you will need double the existing database size of space available.
Regular upgrades can take a considerable amount of time, depending on the size of the database and the speed of the storage system.

A fast upgrade only takes a few minutes, and uses almost no additional disk space.
However, if a fast upgrade fails, you must restore the database from the backup.

> With the fast upgrade the risk to run out of disk space is smaller.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A fast upgrade reduces the risk of running out of disk space.
```

> In case of failure you do not have the implicit backup that you get when doing a regular upgrade.

Reviewer: This line pretty much repeats L47. I'm not particularly happy with the wording, but when I try to rewrite it I just get L47. Might be easiest to just remove this?

> The regular upgrade will copy the database files instead of hardlinking them.

Reviewer: Do we need to define hardlinking? I feel like this sentence could use some more technical exposition in the differences between the two backup methods.

Author: I'd like to avoid to explain such basic Linux technologies.  Maybe, we can rephrase the sentence to make it sound less "dangerous", @Loquacity?
> ... instead of creating hardlinks between them.
If the admin wants to know what this actually is, person can find it with a web search.

Reviewer: Yeah, perhaps. Although, now I realise this is in 3.2, we probably shouldn't do it here. Let's do it in master instead.

PostgreSQL stores data at [path]``/var/lib/pgsql/data/``, and logs to [path]``/var/lib/pgsql/data/pg_xlog/``.

=== Upgrade from PostgreSQL 9.4 to 9.6

Before you migrate to PostgreSQL 9.6, ensure SUSE Manager is the latest version, and fully updated.
You can check if the system is ready to use PostgreSQL 9.6 with:

----
psql --version
----

If you are using PostgreSQL{nbsp}9.4, you can upgrade to PostgreSQL{nbsp}9.6.

[IMPORTANT]
====
PostgreSQL 9.6 requires smdba version 1.5.8 or higher.
Check with:
----
rpm -q smdba
----
====

.Procedure: Performing a Regular Upgrade
. Perform a database backup.
For more information on backing up, see xref:bp_chap_suma_backup.adoc[].

> . Begin the upgrade:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. Start the upgrade:
```

+
----
/usr/lib/susemanager/bin/pg-migrate.sh
----
. When the upgrade has successfully completed, you can safely delete the old database directory and reclaim lost disk space.
The old directory is renamed to [path]``/var/lib/pgsql/data-pg94``.

The [path]``pg-migrate.sh`` script performs these operations:

* Stop spacewalk services
* Shut down the running database
* Check if PostgreSQL 9.6 is installed and install it if necessary
* Switch from PostgreSQL 9.4 to PostgreSQL 9.6 as the new default

> * Initiate the database migration

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Start the database migration
```

====
If the upgrade fails, the migration script will attempt to restore the database to its original state.
====

.Procedure: Performing a Fast PostgreSQL Upgrade
. Perform a database backup.
Without a verified database backup, you must not initiate a fast upgrade.
For more information on backing up, see xref:bp_chap_suma_backup.adoc[].
. Begin the upgrade:
+
----
/usr/lib/susemanager/bin/pg-migrate.sh fast
----
. When the upgrade has successfully completed, you can safely delete the old database directory and reclaim lost disk space.
The old directory is renamed to [path]``/var/lib/pgsql/data-pg94``.

=== Upgrade from PostgreSQL 9.6 to 10

Before you migrate to PostgreSQL 9.10, ensure SUSE Manager is the latest version, and fully updated.
You can check if the system is ready to use PostgreSQL 9.10 with:

----
psql --version
----

If you are using PostgreSQL{nbsp}9.6, you can upgrade to PostgreSQL{nbsp}10.

[IMPORTANT]
====
PostgreSQL 9.10 requires smdba version 1.6.2 or higher.
Check with:
----
rpm -q smdba
----
====

.Procedure: Performing a Regular Upgrade
. Perform a database backup.
// For more information on backing up, see xref:administration:backup-restore.adoc[].

> . Begin the upgrade:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. Start the upgrade:
```

+
----
/usr/lib/susemanager/bin/pg-migrate-96-to-10.sh
----
. When the upgrade has successfully completed, you can safely delete the old database directory and reclaim lost disk space.
The old directory is renamed to [path]``/var/lib/pgsql/data-pg96``.

The [path]``pg-migrate-96-to-10.sh`` script performs these operations:

* Stop spacewalk services
* Shut down the running database
* Check if PostgreSQL{nbsp}10 is installed and install it if necessary
* Switch from PostgreSQL{nbsp}9.6 to PostgreSQL{nbsp}10 as the new default
* Initiate the database migration
* Create a PostgreSQL configuration file tuned for use by {productname}
* Start the database and spacewalk services

[NOTE]
====
If the upgrade fails, the migration script will attempt to restore the database to its original state.
====

.Procedure: Performing a Fast PostgreSQL Upgrade
. Perform a database backup.
Without a verified database backup, you must not initiate a fast upgrade.
// For more information on backing up, see xref:administration:backup-restore.adoc[].

> . Begin the upgrade:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. Start the upgrade:
```

[[bp.postgresql.database.migration.new.installations]]
== New {productname} Installations

PostgreSQL version 10 is now supported on {productname}.
New {productname} installations will have PostgreSQL version 10 installed by default.
When you install {productname} on {sle}{nbsp}12 SP4, the latest version of PostgreSQL will be installed by default.
This will be fully transparent to the user.
Check the active PostgreSQL version with this command:

----
suse-manager-example-srv:~ # psql --version
psql (PostgreSQL) 10.9
----

[[bp.postgresql.database.migrating.existing.installations]]
== Migrating an Existing Installation

[WARNING]
====
Always create a database backup before performing a migration.
For more information about a database backup, see xref:bp_chap_suma_backup.adoc[].
====

PostgreSQL upgrades can be performed in two ways: a regular upgrade, or a fast upgrade:

A regular upgrade will create a complete copy of the database, so you will need double the existing database size of space available.
Regular upgrades can take a considerable amount of time, depending on the size of the database and the speed of the storage system.

> Regular upgrades also require database downtime, your database will not be accessible while the upgrade is running.

Reviewer 2: I would delete this sentence as it could provoke false expectations! Also with a fast upgrade, the database needs to be down! Just not that long :)

> A fast upgrade only takes a few minutes, and uses no additional disk space.

Reviewer 2: "ALMOST no additional disk space" is maybe safer...

include::entities.adoc[]

> {productname} 3 uses PostgreSQL database version 9.4.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
{productname} 3 uses PostgreSQL version 9.4.
{productname} 3.2 uses PostgreSQL version 10.

```

Bringing these together to make it clearer.

> PostgreSQL version 9.6 has been officially released for {sls} 12 SP3, and version 10 for {sls} 12 SP4 and later.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
PostgreSQL version 9.6 has been released for {sls} 12 SP3.
PostgreSQL version 10 has been released for {sls} 12 SP4 and later.
```

Split this just to make it super clear what's going on, otherwise the clauses get a little confusing with all the version numbers.

> Now PostgreSQL 10 is the base version provided by {productname} 3.2.

Reviewer: ```suggestion

```

> This chapter provides guidance on migrating an existing 9.4 database to 9.6 and 9.6 to 10 on your {productname} Server.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This chapter provides guidance on migrating your {productname} Server from PostgreSQL 9.4 to 9.6, or migrating from 9.6 to 10.
```

Hopefully that's clearer. Might need to be two sentences.

[[bp.postgresql.database.migration.new.installations]]
== New {productname} Installations

> Support for PostgreSQL version 10 has been officially released for SUSE Manager, no action will be required for new installations.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
PostgreSQL version 10 is now supported on {productname}.
New {productname} installations will have PostgreSQL version 10 installed by default.
```

> The {productname} extension will pick up the latest version during installation on SLES 12 SP4.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When you install {productname} on {sle}{nbsp}12 SP4, the latest version of PostgreSQL will be installed by default.
```

This will be fully transparent to the user.

> Check the active PostgreSQL version with the following command:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Check the active PostgreSQL version with this command:
```

----
suse-manager-example-srv:~ # psql --version
psql (PostgreSQL) 10.9
----

[[bp.postgresql.database.migrating.existing.installations]]
== Migrating an Existing Installation

> === PostgreSQL 9.4 to 9.6

Reviewer: ```suggestion
=== Upgrade from PostgreSQL 9.4 to 9.6
```

> Before migrating to the database version 9.6, ensure SUSE Manager is fully patched to the latest version.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Before you migrate to PostgreSQL 9.6, ensure SUSE Manager is the latest version, and fully updated.
```

> You can check if the system is ready to use PostgreSQL 9.6 by issuing the following command:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can check if the system is ready to use PostgreSQL 9.6 with this command:
```

[IMPORTANT]
====
PostgreSQL 9.6 requires smdba version 1.5.8 or higher
====

[WARNING]
====
Always create a database backup before performing a migration
====

The database migration begins by executing the following command:

----
$> /usr/lib/susemanager/bin/pg-migrate.sh
----

> The [path]``pg-migrate.sh`` script will automatically perform the following operations:

Reviewer 2: I do not have the context here but want to point out that meanwhile we are using new scripts that explicitly contain the version (pg-migrate-94-to-96.sh and pg-migrate-96-to-10.sh). For compatibility, the old name pg-migrate.sh gets installed as symbolic link to pg-migrate-94-to-96.sh

As I already said, I would like to get rid of any mention of version 9.4 at all. This database version cannot any longer be used since about a year as it is missing new functionality we are using meanwhile.

Author: I'm referencing the new script in the section about the 9.6 to 10 migration.  But you are right, there was a error with the sectioning levels...

I see your point that 9.4 is very outdated.  But in the description of https://github.com/SUSE/spacewalk/issues/8324 (from July 2019) we have a report that someone was still using 9.4 and now wanted to upgrade SLES 12 SP4 (with postgresql 10).  That why I think we should still mention 9.4 in the SUMA 3.2 documentation.  We no longer provide this migration description (from 9.4 to 9.6) in the SUMA 4 documentation.

Thanks for your help, Hubert!

[IMPORTANT]
====
PostgreSQL 9.6 requires smdba version 1.5.8 or higher
====

[WARNING]
====
Always create a database backup before performing a migration
====

The database migration begins by executing the following command:

----
$> /usr/lib/susemanager/bin/pg-migrate.sh
----

The [path]``pg-migrate.sh`` script will automatically perform the following operations:

* Stop spacewalk services
* Shut down the running database
* Check if PostgreSQL 9.6 is installed and install it if not already present
* Switch from PostgreSQL 9.4 to PostgreSQL 9.6 as the new default

> * Initiates the database migration

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Initiate the database migration
```

> * Creates a PostgreSQL configuration file tuned for use by SUSE Manager (The reason for the latest version of smdba)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Create a PostgreSQL configuration file tuned for use by SUSE Manager.
This is why the latest version of smdba is required.
```

Not sure about this line.

* Start both the database and spacewalk services

[NOTE]
====
During the migration the data directory of the database is copied for use by the PostgreSQL 9.6.
This results in temporarily doubling the amount of required disk space.
In case of a failure, the migration script will attempt a restore to the original state.
After a successful migration, you may safely delete the old database directory (renamed to /var/lib/pgsql/data-pg94) to reclaim lost disk space.
====

> ==== Performing a Fast Migration

Reviewer: We're deep in the heading levels now. Should this be a procedure heading?

Author: redone

> There are two negative aspects to performing a regular migration:

Reviewer: ??

Author: solve with re-using texts from master.

====

> Perform a fast migration with the following command (ensure you have a database backup):

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Before you begin, ensure you have a database backup.
Perform a fast migration with this command:
```

----
$> /usr/lib/susemanager/bin/pg-migrate.sh fast
----

=== PostgreSQL 9.6 to 10

==== Prepare to Upgrade

Before you begin the upgrade, prepare your existing 3.2 system and create a database backup.

PostgreSQL stores data at [path]``/var/lib/pgsql/data/``, and logs to [path]``/var/lib/pgsql/data/pg_xlog/``.

.Procedure: Preparing to Upgrade

. Check the active PostgreSQL version:
+
----
psql --version
----
+

> If you are using PostgreSQL{nbsp}9.6, you can upgrade to PostgreSQL{nbsp}10.

Reviewer: Check the {nbsp} throughout, I can't tell if you've put them in or not.

Author: yes, might be worth checking

. Check the active smdba version:
+
----
rpm -q smdba
----
+
PostgreSQL{nbsp}10 requires ``smdba`` version 1.6.2 or later.

. Perform a database backup.
// For more information on backing up, see xref:administration:backup-restore.adoc[].

==== Upgrade PostgreSQL

[WARNING]
====
Always create a database backup before performing a migration.
For more information about a database backup, see xref:db-migration.adoc#db-migration-prepare[].
====

PostgreSQL upgrades can be performed in two ways: a regular upgrade, or a fast upgrade:

A regular upgrade will create a complete copy of the database, so you will need double the existing database size of space available.
Regular upgrades can take a considerable amount of time, depending on the size of the database and the speed of the storage system.
Regular upgrades also require database downtime, your database will not be accessible while the upgrade is running.

A fast upgrade only takes a few minutes, and uses no additional disk space.
However, if a fast upgrade fails, you must restore the database from the backup.
With the fast upgrade the risk to run out of disk space is smaller.

> In case of failure you do not have the implicit backup that you get when doing a regular upgrade.

Reviewer: This sentence needs help.

Author: see above.
